Git is a distributed version control system used for tracking changes in files and collaborating on software projects.
It allows multiple developers to work on the same project simultaneously without overwriting each other's changes.
Git helps in managing different versions of a project, rollback to previous states, and collaborate with teammates efficiently.
Basic Concepts
Repository: A repository or repo is a collection of files and directories that make up a project.
Commit: A commit is a snapshot of the current state of your files in the repository. It represents a specific version of your project.
Branch: A branch is an independent line of development. It allows you to work on different features or fixes separately.
Merge: Merging combines changes from different branches into a single branch to integrate the changes made by multiple developers.
Remote: A remote repository is a version of your project that is hosted on a server or a different machine. It allows for collaboration and synchronization between team members.
Git Commands
git init : Initializes a new Git repository in your current working directory.
git add <file> : Stages a file or directory for the next commit.
git commit -m "Commit message" : Creates a new commit with the changes you have staged.
git status : Shows the current state of your repository, including modified files and staged changes.
git log : Displays the commit history of your repository.
git branch : Lists all the branches in your repository and highlights the current branch.
git branch <branch-name> : Creates a new branch.
git checkout <branch-name> : Switches to a different branch.
git merge <branch-name> : Merges the changes from the specified branch into the current branch.
git remote add origin <remote-url> : Associates your local repository with a remote repository.
git push origin <branch-name> : Pushes your local branch and commits to the remote repository.
git pull origin <branch-name> : Retrieves and merges the latest changes from the remote repository.
Best Practices
Commit frequently and write clear commit messages to track changes effectively.
Use branches to work on features or bug fixes separately and merge them later.
Before merging, pull the latest changes from the remote repository to avoid conflicts.
Review code changes and use tools like pull requests for effective collaboration.
When encountering conflicts, carefully resolve them, test the code, and ensure it works as expected.
